Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station: blood — plasma,
red cells and erythropoiesis. I shall take the candidate through it,
question by question. Let us begin.
Describe the composition of blood.
Blood is a specialised connective tissue, a suspension of cells in a fluid matrix,
the plasma, making up about seven to eight per cent of body weight,
some five litres in an adult. When separated, it divides into two parts.
The formed elements, the cells, comprise the red cells, or erythrocytes,
which are by far the most numerous and carry oxygen; the white cells,
or leucocytes, of several types serving defence and immunity; and the platelets,
cell fragments essential to haemostasis.
The proportion of the blood volume occupied by the red cells is the haematocrit,
normally around forty to forty-five per cent.
The plasma, the remaining fluid, is largely water with dissolved proteins,
electrolytes, nutrients, wastes, hormones and gases.
Serum is plasma from which the clotting factors have been removed by clotting.
So blood is a suspension of formed elements — red cells carrying oxygen,
white cells for defence, and platelets for haemostasis — in plasma,
the red cells occupying about forty to forty-five per cent of the volume as the
haematocrit, the plasma carrying proteins,
electrolytes and solutes — a tissue serving transport, defence and haemostasis.
Describe the plasma proteins and their functions.
The plasma proteins, at a total concentration of around sixty to eighty grams per
litre, are of three main groups with diverse and vital functions.
Albumin is the most abundant, made by the liver;
being relatively small and numerous it provides the greater part of the plasma
oncotic pressure that holds water in the circulation,
and it is a major transport protein, carrying many drugs, hormones, bilirubin,
fatty acids and ions.
The globulins include the immunoglobulins, or antibodies,
made by plasma cells for immune defence,
and transport globulins carrying specific substances such as iron and thyroid
hormone. Fibrinogen and the other clotting factors, made by the liver,
are essential to coagulation.
Collectively the plasma proteins also act as buffers and contribute to viscosity.
So the plasma proteins are albumin — the chief contributor to oncotic pressure and
a major transporter; the globulins — including the antibodies for immunity and
specific transport proteins; and fibrinogen and the clotting factors for
coagulation — together providing oncotic pressure, transport, immunity,
clotting and buffering, most being made by the liver.
Describe the structure and function of the red blood cell.
The red blood cell is exquisitely adapted to its function of carrying oxygen.
It is a biconcave disc, about seven micrometres across,
a shape that maximises its surface area for gas exchange and gives it the
flexibility to deform and squeeze through capillaries narrower than itself.
In maturing, it extrudes its nucleus and organelles,
so the mature cell has no nucleus, no mitochondria and no capacity for protein
synthesis or division; this maximises the space for haemoglobin and means it relies
on anaerobic glycolysis for its modest energy needs, sparing the oxygen it carries.
It is packed with haemoglobin, which binds and carries the oxygen.
Its membrane, supported by a flexible cytoskeleton,
maintains the biconcave shape and deformability.
Lacking the machinery for repair, it survives about a hundred and twenty days.
So the red cell is a biconcave, flexible, anucleate disc packed with haemoglobin,
its shape maximising surface area and deformability,
its lack of nucleus and mitochondria maximising haemoglobin content and sparing
oxygen, surviving about a hundred and twenty days — a cell wholly specialised for
oxygen transport.
Describe erythropoiesis and its regulation.
Erythropoiesis is the production of red cells, which occurs in the red bone marrow,
where pluripotent haematopoietic stem cells, through a series of precursors,
give rise to red cells that, having extruded their nuclei,
are released as reticulocytes maturing in the circulation.
Because red cells are continually destroyed,
production must continually replace them,
and it is regulated to match supply to demand.
The principal regulator is erythropoietin,
a hormone produced chiefly by the kidney in response to tissue hypoxia:
a fall in oxygen delivery, as in anaemia, hypoxaemia or altitude,
stimulates its release, which acts on the marrow to increase red cell production;
restoration of oxygenation reduces it — a negative-feedback loop keeping the red
cell mass appropriate.
Adequate raw materials are also required: iron for haemoglobin,
and vitamin B-twelve and folate for cell division.
So erythropoiesis is the marrow production of red cells,
regulated chiefly by erythropoietin from the kidney,
released in response to tissue hypoxia to match red cell production to oxygen
demand, and dependent on iron, vitamin B-twelve and folate — a feedback system
maintaining the red cell mass, whose failure causes anaemia.
What happens to red cells at the end of their life?
As the red cell ages over its hundred and twenty days,
lacking the means to repair itself,
its membrane and enzymes deteriorate and it becomes less deformable.
The senescent cells are recognised and removed by the macrophages of the
reticuloendothelial system, principally in the spleen but also in the liver and
marrow, which phagocytose them and break down their contents for recycling.
The globin is broken to amino acids for reuse.
The iron of the haem is salvaged and recycled,
bound to transferrin and returned to the marrow or stored.
The remainder of the haem is converted to bilirubin, which is carried,
bound to albumin, to the liver, where it is conjugated and excreted in the bile,
giving the bile and stool their colour;
impaired handling of bilirubin causes jaundice.
So at the end of their life red cells are removed and broken down by splenic and
hepatic macrophages: the globin and iron are recycled,
and the haem is converted to bilirubin,
which the liver conjugates and excretes in bile — an efficient recycling whose
disturbance produces jaundice.
Describe the physical determinants of blood viscosity and flow.
Blood is not a simple fluid but a suspension,
so its viscosity — its resistance to flow — is more complex than that of water,
and this matters because, by Poiseuille's relationship,
flow is inversely proportional to viscosity.
The chief determinant of blood viscosity is the haematocrit: the more red cells,
the more viscous the blood, the relationship being steep at high haematocrits,
so that polycythaemia markedly increases viscosity and the work of the heart,
while anaemia reduces it.
Blood is also non-Newtonian: its viscosity falls as the shear rate rises,
because at higher flow the red cells align and deform,
so it flows more easily when flowing fast; at very low flow,
viscosity rises and cells may aggregate.
In the smallest vessels the apparent viscosity falls — the Fahraeus-Lindqvist
effect — as cells stream axially.
So blood viscosity, which inversely affects flow,
is determined chiefly by the haematocrit — rising steeply in polycythaemia — and is
non-Newtonian, falling at higher shear rates as red cells align,
with a reduced apparent viscosity in small vessels;
rheological properties relevant to perfusion and to the optimal haematocrit.
What is the relevance of red cell and blood physiology to anaesthesia?
Red cell and blood physiology is highly relevant to anaesthesia,
centring on oxygen delivery.
The haemoglobin concentration is a principal determinant of the oxygen-carrying
capacity of the blood, so anaemia reduces oxygen delivery,
which must be weighed in deciding on transfusion,
balanced against its risks — the basis of transfusion thresholds.
The oxygen delivery depends on the product of cardiac output and arterial oxygen
content, so the body compensates for anaemia by raising cardiac output,
a reserve that may be limited in the sick or anaesthetised patient.
Blood viscosity and the haematocrit affect perfusion,
with an optimal haematocrit balancing oxygen-carrying capacity against viscosity.
Disorders of the red cells, such as sickle cell disease,
have specific anaesthetic implications.
So blood physiology is central to anaesthesia through oxygen delivery:
haemoglobin sets the oxygen-carrying capacity,
anaemia is compensated by raised cardiac output and guides transfusion decisions,
the haematocrit balances carriage against viscosity,
and red cell disorders carry specific implications — making the maintenance of
oxygen delivery a constant anaesthetic concern.
Pull it together: how is blood adapted to its transport function?
I would draw it together around blood as a tissue specialised for transport,
above all of oxygen, with its components matched to their tasks.
The plasma carries the dissolved substances — nutrients, wastes, hormones,
electrolytes and gases — and its proteins provide oncotic pressure, transport,
immunity and clotting.
The red cells, biconcave, flexible and packed with haemoglobin,
carry the bulk of the oxygen, their number regulated by erythropoietin to match
oxygen demand, and recycled efficiently at the end of their life.
The amount of haemoglobin sets the oxygen-carrying capacity,
and the haematocrit balances this against viscosity for optimal flow.
The white cells and platelets serve defence and haemostasis.
The whole is a fluid tissue continuously circulated to deliver oxygen and nutrients
and remove wastes.
So blood is adapted for transport by its plasma carrying dissolved solutes and
functional proteins, and its red cells, specialised and haemoglobin-rich,
carrying oxygen in a quantity regulated to demand and balanced against viscosity —
an integrated transport tissue whose central anaesthetic importance is the delivery
of oxygen.
How is anaemia classified and what are its main causes?
Anaemia is a reduction in the haemoglobin concentration below the normal range,
reducing the oxygen-carrying capacity of the blood,
and it is usefully classified by the size of the red cells, the mean cell volume,
which points to the cause.
Microcytic anaemia, with small cells,
is most often due to iron deficiency — from blood loss or poor intake — and to the
thalassaemias.
Normocytic anaemia, with normal-sized cells,
includes the anaemia of acute blood loss before the cells change,
the anaemia of chronic disease, and that of renal failure from reduced
erythropoietin, and haemolysis.
Macrocytic anaemia, with large cells,
is typically due to deficiency of vitamin B-twelve or folate,
impairing the deoxyribonucleic-acid synthesis of the dividing precursors,
and to other causes such as alcohol and hypothyroidism.
So anaemia is a low haemoglobin reducing oxygen carriage,
classified by mean cell volume into microcytic — chiefly iron deficiency and
thalassaemia; normocytic — acute blood loss, chronic disease,
renal failure and haemolysis; and macrocytic — chiefly B-twelve and folate
deficiency — a classification that directs the search for the cause,
important to assess before anaesthesia.
Describe iron metabolism.
Iron is essential, chiefly for haemoglobin,
but also toxic in excess and not actively excreted,
so the body conserves and tightly regulates it.
Dietary iron is absorbed in the duodenum, the ferrous form better than the ferric,
the amount absorbed being regulated according to the body's stores and needs — the
principal point of control, since there is no regulated route of excretion.
Absorbed iron is carried in the plasma bound to transferrin,
which delivers it to the marrow for haemoglobin synthesis and to other tissues.
Iron is stored, mainly in the liver and macrophages, as ferritin and haemosiderin.
Crucially, the iron from broken-down red cells is efficiently recycled by the
macrophages, providing most of the daily need, so dietary requirement is modest.
The hormone hepcidin regulates absorption and release.
So iron metabolism is one of conservation and recycling:
dietary iron is absorbed in a regulated manner in the duodenum,
carried by transferrin, used for haemoglobin, stored as ferritin,
and — above all — recycled from old red cells by macrophages,
with hepcidin regulating its movements,
there being no regulated excretion — hence the vulnerability to both deficiency and
overload.
Describe the white blood cells and their functions.
The white blood cells, or leucocytes, are the cells of the immune defence,
far fewer than the red cells, and of several types with distinct functions,
divided into granulocytes and others.
The neutrophils, the most numerous,
are the first responders to bacterial infection, phagocytosing and killing bacteria.
The lymphocytes are the cells of specific, adaptive immunity:
the B lymphocytes produce antibodies,
and the T lymphocytes mediate cellular immunity and regulate the response.
The monocytes circulate and become tissue macrophages,
phagocytosing debris and microbes and presenting antigen.
The eosinophils act against parasites and in allergic responses, and the basophils,
with the tissue mast cells, release histamine in allergic and inflammatory
reactions.
So the white cells comprise the neutrophils,
the first-line phagocytes against bacteria; the lymphocytes, B and T,
of adaptive antibody and cellular immunity; the monocytes and macrophages,
phagocytosing and presenting antigen; and the eosinophils and basophils,
in parasitic and allergic responses — together providing innate and adaptive
defence, relevant to infection and to allergic reactions in anaesthesia.
Describe platelets and their production.
Platelets are not whole cells but small, anucleate fragments,
two to four micrometres across, derived from the cytoplasm of the megakaryocytes of
the bone marrow, which shed thousands of platelets each.
They circulate for about eight to ten days,
and their normal count is around one hundred and fifty to four hundred thousand per
microlitre.
Despite lacking a nucleus, they are metabolically active and contain granules — the
dense granules storing adenosine diphosphate, calcium and serotonin,
and the alpha granules storing proteins such as fibrinogen and von Willebrand
factor — whose release is central to their function in haemostasis.
Their production is regulated by the hormone thrombopoietin, from the liver,
which stimulates the megakaryocytes. They are removed by the spleen,
where about a third are normally pooled.
So platelets are anucleate cytoplasmic fragments from marrow megakaryocytes,
circulating eight to ten days at a count of one hundred and fifty to four hundred
thousand, containing dense and alpha granules essential to haemostasis,
their production regulated by thrombopoietin and a third pooled in the spleen —
their number and function being important to perioperative bleeding.
Describe the determinants of blood viscosity and the concept of an optimal
haematocrit.
Since flow is, by Poiseuille's relationship, inversely proportional to viscosity,
the viscosity of the blood affects the work of the circulation,
and its chief determinant is the haematocrit.
As the haematocrit rises, the blood becomes more viscous,
the relationship steepening at high values,
so that polycythaemia greatly increases viscosity,
impairing flow and raising cardiac work and the risk of thrombosis;
anaemia reduces viscosity, easing flow.
This creates a trade-off, because while a higher haematocrit increases the
oxygen-carrying capacity, it also increases viscosity and impairs flow,
and oxygen delivery is the product of the content and the flow.
There is therefore an optimal haematocrit that maximises oxygen delivery by
balancing carrying capacity against viscosity — in health around the normal value
of forty to forty-five per cent, though the optimum varies with circumstances.
So blood viscosity is determined chiefly by the haematocrit,
rising steeply in polycythaemia to impair flow,
and because oxygen delivery is content times flow,
there is an optimal haematocrit that balances the oxygen-carrying capacity against
viscosity to maximise delivery — a concept relevant to transfusion and to
haemodilution.
Describe haemolysis and the resulting jaundice.
Haemolysis is the premature destruction of red cells before their normal lifespan,
which, if it outpaces the marrow's compensatory increase in production,
causes a haemolytic anaemia, and it has characteristic consequences from the
released contents.
It may be inherited — from membrane defects,
enzyme defects such as glucose-six-phosphate-dehydrogenase deficiency,
or abnormal haemoglobins such as sickle cell — or acquired,
from immune destruction, mechanical damage, infection or drugs.
The accelerated breakdown of haemoglobin produces an excess of bilirubin in its
unconjugated form, faster than the liver can conjugate it, causing a pre-hepatic,
unconjugated hyperbilirubinaemia and jaundice;
other features include a raised lactate dehydrogenase, a reduced haptoglobin,
and a reticulocytosis as the marrow responds.
This contrasts with the conjugated hyperbilirubinaemia of hepatic and obstructive
jaundice.
So haemolysis is premature red-cell destruction, inherited or acquired,
causing haemolytic anaemia if it exceeds marrow compensation,
and producing an unconjugated hyperbilirubinaemia with pre-hepatic jaundice,
a reticulocytosis and other markers — distinguished from the conjugated jaundice of
liver and biliary disease, and relevant to anaesthesia in conditions such as sickle
cell disease.
Describe the functions of the spleen relevant to blood.
The spleen is the largest lymphoid organ and has several functions in relation to
the blood, acting as a filter, a reservoir and an immune organ.
As a filter, its specialised circulation brings blood into close contact with
macrophages, which remove aged, damaged and abnormal red cells — the principal site
of red-cell destruction — and remove particles and inclusion bodies from cells,
and clear encapsulated bacteria.
As a reservoir, it stores a proportion of the platelets, about a third,
and can release blood cells. As an immune organ,
it contains lymphoid tissue mounting responses to blood-borne antigens and
producing antibody.
In fetal life it contributes to blood-cell formation,
a capacity that can be reactivated.
The consequences of its absence are instructive:
after splenectomy there is a rise in the platelet count and the appearance of
abnormal red-cell forms, and an increased risk of overwhelming infection by
encapsulated organisms, requiring vaccination and prophylaxis.
So the spleen filters and removes aged and abnormal red cells and clears
encapsulated bacteria, stores platelets,
and serves blood-borne immunity — its removal causing thrombocytosis,
abnormal red-cell forms and a dangerous susceptibility to encapsulated infection.
Summarise the central role of blood in oxygen delivery and the relevance to
transfusion.
I would summarise it around the principle that the central physiological purpose of
blood, for the anaesthetist, is to deliver oxygen,
and that this frames the decision to transfuse.
The oxygen-carrying capacity depends on the haemoglobin concentration,
so anaemia reduces it; the body compensates by increasing the cardiac output and
oxygen extraction, a reserve that maintains delivery down to a surprisingly low
haemoglobin in the healthy but is limited in those with cardiac or respiratory
disease or under anaesthesia.
Transfusion of red cells restores carrying capacity but carries risks —
immunological, infective and others — and stored blood has reduced
two-three-bisphosphoglycerate and so a left-shifted curve initially.
The decision therefore balances the benefit to oxygen delivery against the risks,
guided by a restrictive threshold in most patients, the haemoglobin,
the rate of loss, and the individual's tolerance and disease.
So blood's central role is oxygen delivery,
set by haemoglobin and supported by compensatory cardiac output;
transfusion restores carrying capacity but carries risk,
so the decision balances oxygen-delivery benefit against harm,
guided by a restrictive threshold and the clinical context — a judgement central to
perioperative care.
Describe the ABO and Rhesus blood group systems.
The blood groups are determined by antigens on the red-cell surface,
and the ABO and Rhesus systems are the most important for transfusion.
In the ABO system, the red cells may carry the A antigen, the B antigen, both,
or neither, giving the groups A, B, AB and O; crucially,
the plasma contains naturally occurring antibodies against the antigens the person
lacks — so a group A person has anti-B antibodies,
and so on — and these antibodies cause an immediate,
severe haemolytic reaction if incompatible blood is given,
making ABO compatibility essential.
Group O, lacking both antigens, is the universal red-cell donor;
group AB the universal recipient. In the Rhesus system,
the most important antigen is the D antigen;
a person is Rhesus positive or negative according to its presence.
Unlike ABO, there are no naturally occurring anti-D antibodies,
but a Rhesus-negative person exposed to Rhesus-positive blood can become sensitised
and form them, important in transfusion and in haemolytic disease of the newborn.
So the ABO system, with its naturally occurring antibodies against absent antigens,
demands compatibility to avoid severe haemolysis,
group O being the universal red-cell donor; the Rhesus system,
chiefly the D antigen, causes sensitisation on exposure rather than naturally
occurring antibodies — both fundamental to safe transfusion.
Describe the main transfusion reactions.
Transfusion of blood carries risks,
including several types of reaction that the anaesthetist must recognise and
prevent.
The most feared is the acute haemolytic reaction, usually from ABO incompatibility,
generally due to error: the recipient's antibodies destroy the donor cells,
causing fever, hypotension, haemoglobinuria,
renal failure and disseminated intravascular coagulation,
and it can be rapidly fatal — prevention by correct checking is paramount.
Febrile non-haemolytic reactions, from antibodies to donor white cells,
are common but usually mild. Allergic reactions, from plasma proteins,
range from urticaria to anaphylaxis.
Transfusion-related acute lung injury is a serious reaction causing acute pulmonary
oedema from donor antibodies. Transfusion-associated circulatory overload is fluid
overload from the volume given.
There are also infective risks and, with massive transfusion,
metabolic disturbances.
So transfusion reactions include the acute haemolytic reaction,
usually from ABO incompatibility through error and potentially fatal;
febrile and allergic reactions; transfusion-related acute lung injury;
circulatory overload; and infective and metabolic complications — a range of
hazards making correct checking and judicious use essential,
and recognition under anaesthesia, where signs are masked, especially important.
Describe the physiology of sickle cell disease.
Sickle cell disease is an inherited disorder of haemoglobin with important
anaesthetic implications, arising from a single point mutation in the beta-globin
gene that produces an abnormal haemoglobin, haemoglobin S.
The key property of haemoglobin S is that, when deoxygenated,
its molecules polymerise into rigid fibres that distort the red cell into the
characteristic sickle shape.
These sickled cells are rigid, so they obstruct the microcirculation,
causing painful vaso-occlusive crises and tissue infarction, and they are fragile,
causing a chronic haemolytic anaemia.
Sickling is precipitated by anything that promotes deoxygenation or stresses the
cells — hypoxia, acidosis, dehydration, cold,
infection and stasis — precisely the conditions that anaesthesia and surgery can
produce.
Management therefore centres on avoiding these triggers: maintaining oxygenation,
warmth, hydration and good perfusion, and avoiding acidosis.
So sickle cell disease results from haemoglobin S,
which polymerises when deoxygenated to sickle and rigidify the red cells,
causing vaso-occlusive crises and haemolytic anaemia;
sickling is precipitated by hypoxia, acidosis, dehydration, cold and stasis,
so anaesthetic management centres on avoiding these triggers — a disorder demanding
meticulous perioperative care.
Describe the haematopoietic hierarchy and the regulation of blood cell production.
All the blood cells arise from a common origin in the bone marrow through an
ordered hierarchy, a system of continual renewal.
At the apex is the pluripotent haematopoietic stem cell,
which has two defining capacities: self-renewal, maintaining its own population,
and differentiation into all the blood cell lineages.
These stem cells give rise to progressively more committed progenitor cells — first
to lineages of the myeloid series, giving red cells, platelets,
granulocytes and monocytes, and the lymphoid series,
giving lymphocytes — which then mature into the circulating cells.
This proliferation and differentiation is regulated by specific growth factors and
hormones acting on the appropriate progenitors: erythropoietin for red cells,
thrombopoietin for platelets, and the colony-stimulating factors for the white
cells, allowing production of each lineage to be matched to demand — as the rise in
white cells in infection.
In the adult, haematopoiesis is confined to the central skeleton.
So blood cells arise from self-renewing,
pluripotent haematopoietic stem cells through committed myeloid and lymphoid
progenitors, their production of each lineage regulated by specific factors —
erythropoietin, thrombopoietin and the colony-stimulating factors — matching output
to demand, a continually renewing hierarchy in the marrow.
Describe the storage of blood and the blood products available.
Donated blood is processed and stored as components rather than whole blood,
allowing each patient to receive what is needed and each component to be stored
optimally.
Red cells are stored refrigerated, with an anticoagulant-preservative solution,
for several weeks; during storage they undergo the storage lesion — a fall in
two-three-bisphosphoglycerate, left-shifting the dissociation curve,
a rise in plasma potassium, a fall in pH,
and reduced deformability — changes that partly reverse after transfusion.
Platelets are stored at room temperature with agitation, for only a few days,
as cooling impairs them. Fresh frozen plasma, containing the clotting factors,
is frozen and thawed before use to correct coagulopathy.
Cryoprecipitate, prepared from plasma, is rich in fibrinogen and factor eight.
Specific factor concentrates are also available.
So blood is stored as components: red cells refrigerated for weeks,
developing the storage lesion of reduced two-three-bisphosphoglycerate,
raised potassium and reduced deformability; platelets at room temperature for days;
fresh frozen plasma and cryoprecipitate for clotting factors and fibrinogen —
component therapy allowing targeted replacement,
with the storage changes relevant to massive transfusion.
Describe glucose-six-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency.
Glucose-six-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency is the commonest inherited enzyme
defect of the red cell, X-linked and widespread in certain populations,
and it matters in anaesthesia because of the drugs that can precipitate haemolysis.
The enzyme is essential to the red cell's defence against oxidative stress:
it generates the reduced cofactor that maintains glutathione,
which protects the cell's proteins and membrane from oxidative damage.
The mature red cell, lacking a nucleus and the ability to make new enzyme,
is especially vulnerable.
Normally the deficient cells are stable,
but exposure to oxidative stress — from certain drugs, from infection,
or from the fava bean — overwhelms the impaired defences,
oxidising and damaging the haemoglobin and membrane, and causing acute haemolysis.
The relevance to anaesthesia is the need to avoid drugs known to provoke this.
So glucose-six-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency,
an X-linked red-cell enzyme defect,
impairs the cell's defence against oxidative stress by failing to maintain
glutathione, so that oxidative drugs,
infection or fava beans precipitate acute haemolysis — making the avoidance of
triggering drugs the key anaesthetic consideration.
Summarise the assessment of the blood relevant to anaesthesia.
I would summarise it as the use of the full blood count and related tests to assess
the patient's capacity for oxygen carriage,
haemostasis and defence before and during surgery.
The haemoglobin and haematocrit assess the oxygen-carrying capacity,
anaemia prompting a search for its cause, classified by the mean cell volume,
and informing transfusion decisions; polycythaemia raises viscosity.
The red-cell indices and the reticulocyte count characterise any anaemia and the
marrow's response. The white cell count reflects infection or other disease.
The platelet count assesses one arm of haemostasis,
complemented where needed by coagulation tests.
The blood group and antibody screen prepare for possible transfusion.
Specific conditions — sickle cell, enzyme defects,
abnormal haemoglobins — are sought where relevant.
So the blood is assessed for anaesthesia chiefly by the full blood count —
haemoglobin and haematocrit for oxygen carriage,
the indices and reticulocytes to characterise anaemia,
the white count for infection, and the platelet count for haemostasis — with
grouping and antibody screening for transfusion and targeted tests for specific
disorders, a systematic assessment of the blood's capacity for its central
functions.
Describe the thalassaemias.
The thalassaemias are inherited disorders of haemoglobin in which the production of
one of the globin chains is reduced or absent,
in contrast to the structural abnormality of sickle cell disease,
and they cause anaemia of varying severity.
They are classified by the chain affected:
in alpha thalassaemia the alpha-chain production is reduced,
and in beta thalassaemia the beta-chain production;
the severity depends on how many of the controlling genes are affected.
The reduced output of one chain leads to an imbalance,
with a relative excess of the other chain,
which precipitates and damages the red cells and their precursors,
causing both ineffective production in the marrow and haemolysis,
and a characteristic microcytic, hypochromic anaemia.
The severe forms, such as beta thalassaemia major,
cause a profound transfusion-dependent anaemia with marrow expansion and iron
overload, while the trait is mild.
So the thalassaemias are inherited reductions in the production of the alpha or
beta globin chain, causing chain imbalance that damages red cells and gives a
microcytic anaemia ranging from the mild trait to the severe,
transfusion-dependent major forms with iron overload — distinguished from sickle
cell disease as a quantitative rather than structural haemoglobin defect,
and relevant to preoperative assessment.
Describe polycythaemia.
Polycythaemia is an increase in the red cell mass and so the haemoglobin and
haematocrit above normal, the opposite of anaemia, and it matters because,
while it raises oxygen-carrying capacity,
it raises blood viscosity and the risk of thrombosis.
It is usefully divided by cause.
Relative polycythaemia is an apparent rise from a reduced plasma volume,
as in dehydration, the red cell mass being normal.
True, or absolute, polycythaemia is a real increase in red cell mass,
which is either primary or secondary.
Primary polycythaemia, polycythaemia vera,
is a myeloproliferative disorder with autonomous overproduction of red cells.
Secondary polycythaemia is an appropriate or inappropriate increase driven by
erythropoietin: appropriately raised in chronic hypoxia — chronic lung disease,
cyanotic heart disease, high altitude — as a compensation,
or inappropriately from erythropoietin-secreting lesions.
The raised viscosity impairs flow and predisposes to thrombosis,
with implications for anaesthesia.
So polycythaemia is a raised haemoglobin and haematocrit,
either relative from a low plasma volume, or absolute — primary,
as polycythaemia vera, or secondary to erythropoietin,
appropriately in chronic hypoxia or inappropriately from tumours;
the raised viscosity impairing flow and predisposing to thrombosis,
a perioperative concern.
Describe albumin and its functions in more detail.
Albumin deserves particular attention as the most abundant plasma protein and one
of the most functionally important,
synthesised by the liver and present at around thirty-five to fifty grams per
litre. Its functions are several.
First, and quantitatively most important,
it provides the major part — some three-quarters — of the plasma oncotic pressure,
because it is both abundant and relatively small,
so it is the chief protein holding water within the circulation;
hypoalbuminaemia therefore contributes to oedema.
Second, it is the principal transport protein of the plasma,
binding and carrying a great range of substances — many drugs, bilirubin,
free fatty acids, hormones, calcium and other ions;
this drug binding is important pharmacologically,
as only the unbound fraction is active,
and competition for binding and a low albumin alter free drug levels.
Third, it contributes to the buffering capacity of the plasma and acts as a reserve
of protein.
So albumin, the most abundant plasma protein,
provides most of the oncotic pressure holding water in the circulation,
is the principal transport protein carrying drugs, bilirubin, fatty acids,
hormones and ions — its binding determining free drug levels — and contributes to
buffering; its deficiency causing oedema and altering drug handling,
of direct anaesthetic relevance.
What is the erythrocyte sedimentation rate,
and what does free haemoglobin handling involve?
These are two distinct points about the red cell and its breakdown.
The erythrocyte sedimentation rate is a simple,
non-specific test that measures the rate at which red cells settle out of a column
of anticoagulated blood over an hour.
It is increased when the plasma contains more of the proteins — such as fibrinogen
and the immunoglobulins — that reduce the repulsion between red cells and promote
their aggregation into stacks, which settle faster;
so it rises non-specifically in inflammation, infection, malignancy and pregnancy,
serving as a crude marker of disease activity.
As for free haemoglobin: normally haemoglobin is contained within red cells,
but when haemolysis releases it into the plasma,
the free haemoglobin is bound by the plasma protein haptoglobin,
which carries it to be cleared, protecting the kidneys;
in significant haemolysis the haptoglobin is consumed and falls — a useful marker —
and free haemoglobin may then appear and cause renal injury.
So the erythrocyte sedimentation rate measures red-cell settling,
raised non-specifically by inflammatory proteins as a marker of disease activity,
while free haemoglobin from haemolysis is normally mopped up by haptoglobin — whose
fall signals haemolysis — protecting the kidney until it is overwhelmed;
two distinct aspects of red-cell physiology and pathology.
Summarise the perioperative assessment and optimisation of anaemia.
I would summarise it as the recognition that anaemia is common,
that it independently worsens surgical outcome,
and that it should where possible be identified and corrected before surgery rather
than simply transfused during it — the principle of patient blood management.
Anaemia is detected by the haemoglobin and characterised by the mean cell volume
and further tests to find the cause, most commonly iron deficiency,
but also the other deficiencies, chronic disease and renal causes.
Where time allows, the cause is treated — iron, whether oral or intravenous,
vitamin B-twelve or folate, or erythropoietin in renal disease — to raise the
haemoglobin before surgery, reducing the need for transfusion and its risks.
Intraoperatively, blood loss is minimised,
and transfusion is guided by a restrictive threshold and the clinical context
rather than given liberally.
So perioperative anaemia is assessed by the haemoglobin and its cause sought and,
where possible, corrected before surgery — with iron,
vitamins or erythropoietin — as part of patient blood management,
while intraoperative loss is minimised and transfusion used restrictively;
an approach that improves outcome by treating the anaemia rather than merely
transfusing it.
Thank you. A thorough account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, Blood (~7-8% of body weight,
~5 L) is a suspension of formed elements — red cells (oxygen carriage),
white cells (defence), platelets (haemostasis) — in plasma;
the red-cell fraction is the haematocrit (~40-45%),
and serum is plasma minus clotting factors.
Second, Plasma proteins (~60-80 g/L):
albumin (chief oncotic contributor and major transporter),
globulins (immunoglobulins for immunity, plus transport globulins),
and fibrinogen/clotting factors — providing oncotic pressure, transport, immunity,
clotting and buffering, most made by the liver.
3.
The red cell is a biconcave, flexible,
anucleate disc packed with haemoglobin (shape maximising surface area and
deformability; no nucleus/mitochondria maximises haemoglobin and spares oxygen,
relying on glycolysis), surviving ~120 days;
senescent cells are removed by splenic/hepatic macrophages,
recycling globin and iron and converting haem to bilirubin (excreted in bile).
Third, Erythropoiesis in the marrow is regulated chiefly by erythropoietin from the
kidney, released in response to tissue hypoxia to match production to oxygen
demand, and requires iron, vitamin B12 and folate;
blood viscosity (which inversely affects flow by Poiseuille) is determined mainly
by haematocrit and is non-Newtonian, falling at higher shear rates.
Fourth, Blood physiology is central to anaesthesia through oxygen delivery:
haemoglobin sets oxygen-carrying capacity,
anaemia is compensated by raised cardiac output and guides transfusion thresholds,
the haematocrit balances carriage against viscosity, and red-cell disorders (e.g.
sickle cell) carry specific implications.
Thank you. That concludes the station.